# Basic Electricity

- [Fundamental Concepts of Electricity](#fundamental-concepts-of-electricity)

## Fundamental Concepts of Electricity
Little is actually known about what electricity actually is, outside of "the force that moves electrons." Rather,
its been known to behave predictably under certain conditions from which laws have been established.

### The Molecule
- Electricity is widely accepted to be the movement of electrons between molecules.
- When molecules are joined or separated, the substance has undergone a **physical change.**
- When the molecules of a substance of modified such that different types of molecules are formed, it has undergone a
  **chemical change.**

### The Atom
- The smallest particle that makes up some type of material is an atom.

#### Inside the atom
- The core of the atom is the **nucleus.**
    - Contains most of the mass of the atom.
    - Contains **protons**, positively charged particles.
    - Also contains **neutrons**, electrically neutral particles.
- Orbiting the nucleus are **electrons**, negatively charged particles.
    - There is typically one electron per proton in an atom.
        - Thus the positive charge of the nucleus is balanced with the negative charge spinning around it.
    - Electrons do not fall into the nucleus despite their attraction to it.
        - The centrifugal force generated by their rotation prevents it.
- The number of protons in an atom determines its element.
    - The number of planetary electrons determines an element's **atomic number.**
    - The number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus determines **atomic weight.**
    - The periodic table of elements is sorted by ascending atomic number, and by atomic weight.

#### Electric forces and atoms
- Subatomic particles (protons, neutrons, and electrons) are electrical in nature.
    - They are most affected by electric force.
    - When an electric force is applied to a conducting medium (i.e. copper wire), electrons in the outer
      orbit of the copper atoms are forced out of orbit and and along the wire.
        - Protons do not move because of their weight; even in the lightest element, hydrogen, the proton is
          about 1,850 times heaver than its electron.
    - An electron sheared from its atom is called a **free electron.**
        - Some electrons in certain metallic atoms are so loosely bound that they are comparatively free to
          move from atom to atom.
        - *The movement of free electrons is the flow of an electric current.*
- Raising the internal energy of an atom higher than its normal state makes it **excited.**
    - Excitation can be produced when an atom collides with particles impelled via electric force.
        - This transfers the energy of the electric source to the atom.
    - The absorption of additional energy can cause loosely bound outer electrons to leave the atom.
        - The additional energy helps them overcome the force that bounds them inside the atom.
- An atom that has lost or gained electrons is said to be **ionized.**
    - An atom can be a **Positive ion** or a **negative ion**.

### Conductors, Semiconductors, and Insulators

|   | Best Conductors | Best Insulators |
|---|-----------------|-----------------|
| 1 | Silver | Dry air |
| 2 | Copper | Glass |
| 3 | Aluminum | Mica |
| 4 | Brass | Asbestos |
| 5 | Iron | Bakelite |

Note that the line between conductor and insulator is gray - electrical motion is known to exist in all substances.

#### Conductors
- Substances that permit the free motion of a large number of electrons.
- Copper wire is an example of a good conductor.
    - Copper wire tends to have many free electrons.
- As an electric force pushes electrons out of orbit, these free electrons travel a short distance to
  their neighboring atom and force a number of its electrons out.
    - This happens through the entire length of the conductor
- The more electrons that can be made to move with a given amount of force the better a conductor a material is.
    - The dimensions of the material also affect its conductivity.
- A good conductor is said to have low opposition, or *resistance*, to the current.
    - The *current* is the flow of electrons.
- Silver, copper, and aluminum are good conductors, with silver being the most conductive.
    - Copper is used more often because it's less expensive.

#### Semiconductors
- Materials that are neither conductors nor insulators are semiconductors.
- Under certain conditions, these materials can act as insulators or conductors.
- Germanium and silicon fall into this category.

#### Insulators
- Materials which have very few free electrons are insulators.
- It takes a large amount of electrical force to shear off electrons of an insulating material.
- Rubber, wood, and glass are examples of poor conductors.

### Static Electricity
- A material in a natural, or neutral, state will not gain or lose electrons when in contact to other neutral bodies.
- If electrons are removed from a material, it will become electrically positive.
- Electrically positive bodies coming in contact with neutral or negative bodies causes a flow of electrons to the
  positive body.
    - The flow continues until both bodies have equal charge.
- Two bodies with unequal charges that are near each other but not in contact exert a force between them known as
  **electrostatic force.**
    - **Static electricity** is the existence of an electric force where current cannot flow.
- Friction is an easy method to generate a static charge.
    - The action of rubbing two materials together can shear off electrons and cause a difference in charge.
        - This doesn't work so well with conductors, as the difference in charges neutralize themselves almost
          as fast as they're created.
        - Static charge is easiest to generate with a hard nonconductive material and a softer nonconductive material.
            - Electrons will not flow until a substantial difference in charge is built up, to the point where
              electrons flow regardless of the material's poor conductivity.

### Charged Bodies
*Like charges repel each other, unlike charges attract each other.*

#### Coulomb's Law of Charges
The amount of attracting/repelling force between two charged bodies depends on:
    1. their charges, and
    2. their distance.

Coulomb's Law states that *charged bodies attract or repel each other with a force that is directly proportional
to the product of their charges, and is inversely proportional to the square of the difference between them.*

### Electric Fields
The space between and around charged bodies in which their influence is felt is an **electric field of force.**
- Also called *electrostatic fields* and *dielectric fields*.
- Can exist in air, solid materials, or a vacuum.
- Always terminated on material objects, and extends between positive and negative charges.
- Fields of force spread out in the space surrounding their point of origin.
    - In general, fields **diminish in proportion to the square of the distance from their source.**

Electrostatic fields are generally represented by lines which are referred to as **electrostatic lines of force.**
- The lines are imaginary and are only representative of the direction and strength of the field.
- Positive charges are always shown leaving the charge, and the negative entering.

### Magnetism
Magnetism is the property of a substance to attract **magnetic materials**.
- Iron, steel, nickel, and cobalt are examples of magnetic materials.
- The points of maximum attraction on a magnet are its **magnetic poles**.
    - Every magnet has two poles.

Magnetic fields exist around magnets.
- The field consists of imaginary lines indicating where a **magnetic force** acts.
    - They originate from the north pole of the magnet and enter the south, returning it to the north pole through the
      magnet itself.
        - This is a **magnetic circuit**, a complete path through which magnetic lines of force may be established
          under the influence of a magnetizing force.

Magnets exist in three groups:
#### Natural Magnets
- *Natural magnets**, or magnets made of magnetite that occur naturally.

#### Artificial Magnets
- By inserting some alloy into a coil of insulated wire, and passing a heavy direct current through the current,
  an artificial magnet is created.
    - A magnet can also be created via **induction**, or by rubbing an alloy with a magnetized material, so that it
      assumes that magnet's magnetic properties.
- *Permanent magnets**, or bars of steel or some other alloy, that have been permanently magnetized.
- *Electromagnets**, composed of soft-iron cores, around which are coils of insulated wire.
    - When an electric current flows through the coil, the core becomes magnetized, and stops when the current stops.
- Artificial magnets can be permanent, or temporary.
    - Permanent magnets retain their magnetic properties after a magnetizing force is removed, temporary do not.
    - Some materials are difficult to magnetize because they have **low permeability.**
        - The magnetic lines of force do not easily distribute themselves evenly through the material.
        - These materials retain a large part of their magnetic strength once magnetized, however, and become permanent
          magnets.
        - **high permeability** substances act in the opposite manner: they are easy to magnetize but do not retain these
          properties when no longer in contact with a magnetic force, and are thus temporary magnets.
    - Temporary magnets contain **residual magnetism**.
        - The property of temporary magnets to retain a small amount of magnetism is important to the buildup of
          voltage in self-excited DC generators.

#### Nature of Magnetism
**Weber's Theory** is a popular explanation of why magnetism behaves as it does.
    - Assumes all magnetic substances are composed of tiny molecular magnets.
    - Unmagnetized materials have the magnetic forces of its molecular magnets neutralized by adjacent molecular
      magnets and thus exhibit no magnetic effect.
    - Magnetized materials have most of their molecular magnets lined up so that the north pole of each molecule
      points in the same direction.
        - In this way, the material has one north and one south pole.
    - Stroking an unmagnetized material with a magnetic one will pull the molecular magnets in the same direction,
      aligning them.
- If a magnet is split in half, each half will still have a north and south pole.
- a magnet can become demagnetized if subjected to severe jarring, heating, or exposure to opposing magnetic fields.

**Domain Theory** is a more modern theory of magnetism based on the electron spin principle.
- It's known that all matter is composed of vast quantities of atoms, each atom containing one or more orbital
  electrons.
    - Electrons are considered to orbit in various shells and subshells depending upon their distance from the
      nucleus.
    - It's believed that electrons revolve on their axes as the revolve around the nucleus of their atom.
- It's known that an electron has both a magnetic and electric field around it.
    - The effectiveness of this magnetic field depends on how many electrons are spinning in which direction.
        - An equal number of electrons spinning clockwise as there are counterclockwise would cancel the magnetic field
          of the magnet.
        - If more electrons are spinning in one direction than the other, the atom is magnetized.
- When a number of magnetized atoms are grouped together to form a substance, their magnetic forces affect each other.
    - This produces a **domain**, or a group of atoms with parallel magnetic fields.
        - there is an intense magnetic field throughout a domain, without the influence of any external magnetic field.
        - Domains in any substance are always magnetized to saturation; if a magnetic force is applied in a different
          direction, the magnetic fields of every constituent atom will also be aligned in the direction.
    - Domains are randomly oriented throughout a substance, so the strong magnetic field generated by a domain may be
      neutralized by another domain oriented in the opposite direction.
- When exposed to an external magnetic force, domains will align themselves with this force.
    - The magnetic force of this substance is determined by how many domains are aligned by the magnetizing force.

#### Magnetic Fields and Lines of Force
If a bar magnet is dipped into iron filings, the filings will be attracted to the ends of the magnet, but not the center.
- **Magnetic lines of force** are imaginary lines drawn to illustrate the direction in which a magnetic field moves,
  from its north pole, outwards and around to the south pole.

Despite being imaginary, many magnetic phenomena can be explained by assuming these lines have real-life properties.
    1. Magnetic lines of force are continuous and will always form closed loops.
    2. Magnetic lines of force will never cross one another.
    3. Parallel magnetic lines of force traveling in opposite directions will repel one another.
        - Lines traveling in the same direction tend to unite with each other and form into single lines
          traveling in a direction determined by the magnetic poles creating the lines of force.
    4. Magnetic lines of force tend to shorten themselves.
        - Thus, the magnetic lines of force existing between two unlike poles cause the poles to be pulled together.
    5. Magnetic lines of force pass through all materials, both magnetic and nonmagnetic.

The space around a magnet in which the magnetic force acts is called a **magnetic field**. The entire quantity of
magnetic lines surrounding a magnet is called **magnetic flux**. Flux in a magnetic circuit corresponds to current
in an electric circuit.